    CS780 Capstone Project:
OBELIX: the Warehouse Robot
                      ​ ​ ​




The best way to learn Reinforcement Learning is to get your
              hands dirty by actually doing it.
                           Table of Contents

Table of Contents​                                                                              2
1. Your First Job in the Industry​                                                              3
2. Task Description​                                                                            4
         2.1 Setting​                                                                           4
         2.2 Difficulty Levels​                                                                 5
         2.3 Competition Format​                                                                6
4. Environment and Codebase​                                                                    7
         4.1 Environment Description​                                                           7
5. Evaluation​                                                                                  9
         5.1 Metric​                                                                            9
         5.2 Development/Test Phase Evaluation​                                                 9
         5.3 LLM Usage Policy​                                                                 10
6. Getting Started: Implementation and Code​                                                   10
         6.1 How to get started?​                                                              11
         6.2 Starter Code​                                                                     11
             6.2.1 Double Deep Q-Network (DDQN)​                                               12
7. Codabench Leaderboard​                                                                      12
         7.1 Competition Link​                                                                 12
         7.2 Registration​                                                                     13
         7.3 Submission Policy​                                                                13
         7.4 Environment & Dependency Requirements​                                            13
8. Evaluation / Grading Criteria​                                                              14
9. Submission Details: Report and Code​                                                        14
10. Timeline​                                                                                  15
         10.1 Phase 1 (Level 1 Dev Phase)​                                                     15
         10.2 Phase 2 (Level 2 Dev Phase)​                                                     15
         10.3 Phase 3 (Level 3 Dev Phase)​                                                     15
         10.4 Phase 4 (Test Phase)​                                                            15
11. Possible Ideas​                                                                            15
         11.1 Background Tutorials​                                                            15
         11.2 Tabular / Value-based Methods​                                                   16
         11.3 Function Approximation and Deep RL​                                              16
         11.4 Evolutionary Strategies & Heuristics​                                            16
         11.5 What approach should I take?​                                                    16
12. Lost? Whom to contact?​                                                                    17
13. References​                                                                                17




NOTE: This is a dynamic document, it will keep getting updated, please keep checking it regularly.
                                                                                                 2
1. Your First Job in the Industry

You have recently graduated and joined a robotics startup that develops warehouse
robots for large e-commerce companies. The company has been building delivery and
warehouse robots that need to interact (e.g., carry, move, etc.) with objects in dynamic
environments. The CTO wants to move beyond hand-coded behaviors (which are brittle
and hard to scale) and leverage modern reinforcement learning to make robots learn
complex manipulation tasks from trial-and-error feedback. Your task is to design an
RL-based policy that maps sensor observations to robot actions.

CTO got to know that you have done CS780: Deep Reinforcement Learning course
from IITK; she decided to hand over this project to you since you are among the few
ones (due to CS780 background) who know DRL inside out. The CTO assigns you the
task of developing an autonomous controller for a mobile robot (called as OBELIX) that
can locate, attach to, and push objects (like boxes) to desired regions reliably even in
partially observable or changing conditions.

Meanwhile, someone else in the company also claims that they can hand-craft or evolve
a better controller. To make it fair and exciting, the CTO organizes an internal
competition: design the best algorithm for the OBELIX robot in a simulated arena. The
robot draws inspiration from the classic 1991 paper by Sridhar Mahadevan and
Jonathan Connell [1], one of the earliest real demonstrations of reinforcement learning
on a physical robot.

In this competition, you will implement a RL algorithm that takes binary or discrete
sensor readings as input and outputs one of five discrete actions. The goal is to make
the robot find the box, attach/push it, and drive it to the boundary (goal) as quickly and
reliably as possible across randomized starting positions and increasing difficulty levels.

This is an individual competition, not a group project. There will be a public
leaderboard on Codabench where your solution will be ranked. Do not share code or
models with classmates unless you want to share grades and career too! Code
similarity checks and viva will be strict : copying leads to F grade, no questions asked!

Everyone must participate actively: aim for multiple submissions during the
development phase to show your experimentation efforts.




NOTE: This is a dynamic document, it will keep getting updated, please keep checking it regularly.
                                                                                                 3
2. Task Description

2.1 Setting

You are given a robot equipped with discrete sensors and a fixed set of 5 actions: rotate
right 45°, rotate right 22°, move forward, rotate left 22°, and rotate left 45° (details
mentioned in section 4). The objective is to design an algorithm (policy) that finds,
pushes and unwedges (at the goal state) the grey box from the arena while using the
minimum possible number of steps within an episode.

At the start of each episode, a grey box is generated at a random location inside the
arena. To remove the box, the robot must navigate toward it using its sensor
observations, attach to it, and push it until the particle reaches the arena boundary,
which defines the goal region. The robot automatically attaches to the grey box upon
contact and automatically unwedges/detaches once the box reaches the boundary. The
box is considered removed only after it is successfully pushed outside the boundary.




NOTE: This is a dynamic document, it will keep getting updated, please keep checking it regularly.
                                                                                                 4
The robot observes the environment using sonar-like sensors that indicate whether the
box is near or far. The figure above shows the robot, arena, grey box, boundary area
sensor range, and directions. There are a total of 8 sensors around the robot, 4 towards
the front and 2 on either side. The sensors provide a bit-based output that is set to 1 if
the sensor detects the box within its region. If the box is in the light blue area, the near
bit is set to 1; if it's in the dark blue area, the far bit is set to 1. The robot also has an
infrared sensor (IR sensor) (represented as a red line on the front), which is set to 1 if
the grey box is sensed by it. Additionally, the robot also senses if the box is attached to
it. This makes the 18 bits of sensory information that the robot receives for each
observation.

For human readability, these are mentioned as 3 distinct states.
First, the robot “Finds” the grey box, then attaches to it and
“Pushes” the box, and finally “Unwedeges” the box at the
boundary. Note, these states are conceptual for humans and
are not directly given to the robot. The robot must infer them
from sensor readings.

Note that, for the robot, the environment is partially observable,
since it only sees within the range allowed by its sensors. If the
box is far from the robot, it may not even know exactly where the box is. It would first
need to explore a bit to get within the box's range. More specifically, the robot does not
know the full state of the environment. It only receives local sensor readings
(observations), making this a Partially Observable Markov Decision Process
(POMDP).

The agent is evaluated based on the cumulative reward obtained at the end of the
episode. At each step, the robot receives a positive reward if any sensor bit is set to 1
and it moves forward. Details on the reward obtained at each step are mentioned in
section on Environment and Codebase details. Episodes terminate when either the box
is unwedged or a maximum step limit (episode horizon) is reached.

2.2 Difficulty Levels

There are 3 difficulty levels across which the robot is evaluated.

Level 1 – Static Box

   ●​ Box remains stationary
   ●​ Robot must locate and push it to boundary




NOTE: This is a dynamic document, it will keep getting updated, please keep checking it regularly.
                                                                                                 5
Level 2 – Blinking Box

   ●​ Box randomly appears and disappears
   ●​ Robot cannot attach when box is invisible
   ●​ Once attached → box stops blinking

Level 3 – Moving + Blinking Box

   ●​ Box moves with constant velocity
   ●​ Box also blinks (like Level 2)
   ●​ Movement stops once robot attaches

All these settings increase the difficulty by introducing partial observability and
non-stationary dynamics.

Additionally, in each of the levels, a vertical wall with a small opening may
appear.

   ●​ The robot cannot push through the wall.
   ●​ If the robot pushes the box into the wall, it receives a negative reward.
   ●​ The robot must navigate through the opening to reach the boundary.

2.3 Competition Format

There will be essentially two phases of the competition: Development Phase and
Testing Phase.

Further, the development phase is sub-divided into three sub-phases, each
corresponding to three levels above. The final test phase will have combinations of all
the three levels.

For each (sub-)phase you will have to submit the learned RL policy algorithm (in the
form of a python code file) on Codabench (details provided later in the document). The
trained agent with a fixed policy is evaluated on all three difficulty levels for 10
runs/episodes with fixed hidden seeds on Codabench. Cumulative reward is captured
across each episode and averaged across 10 episodes to get the mean cumulative
reward for each difficulty level. This is displayed on the leaderboard along with an
average reward score across all the difficulty levels. Note that the evaluation
environment uses hidden random seeds, meaning you cannot overfit to specific
scenarios.


NOTE: This is a dynamic document, it will keep getting updated, please keep checking it regularly.
                                                                                                 6
Check out the Competition timeline in here

4. Environment and Codebase

The           simulation         is      in                 this          GitHub            repo:
https://github.com/Exploration-Lab/CS780-OBELIX

       git clone https://github.com/Exploration-Lab/CS780-OBELIX
       cd CS780-OBELIX
       pip install -r requirements.txt

Please use the instructions provided in the README.md file present in the repo.



   ●​ Run manual_play.py to drive the robot manually (keys: w=forward, a/q=left
      turns, d/e=right turns) and observe sensor feedback and reward in the terminal
      and the states in another box (as shown in the images above). Note you can run
      the environment on your laptop (CPU), GPU is not required.



4.1 Environment Description
           ○​ Observations (partial state): A vector of 18-bit readings (16 bits from the
              sonar sensors, a bit for the infrared sensor and a box attachment bit)
                 ■​ Example observation:

                      ​
                      obs = [0,1,0,0,1,0,0,1, ...]                  # length 18




                             Sensor Type                 Count            Description

                      Sonar sensors (near)           8             Detect box in near region

                      Sonar sensors (far)            8             Detect box in far region

                      Infrared sensor                1             Detect box directly ahead

                      Attachment sensor              1             Indicates robot is attached
                                                                   to grey box




NOTE: This is a dynamic document, it will keep getting updated, please keep checking it regularly.
                                                                                                 7
           ○​ Actions: Discrete 5: "L45" (left 45°), "L22" (left 22.5°), "FW" (forward),
              "R22", "R45".

                            Action                      Description

                 L45                              Rotate left 45°

                 L22                              Rotate left 22.5°

                 FW                               Move forward

                 R22                              Rotate right 22.5°

                 R45                              Rotate right 45°

           ○​ Rewards: The agent receives a reward at each time step according to the
              observation table below

                                           Observation                                Reward

                left/right far/near sensor bit is set to 1                            +1

                Forward sensor far bit is set to 1                                    +2

                Forward sensor near bit is set to 1                                   +3

                Infrared sensor bit is set to 1                                       +5

                    ●​ Robot is stuck against wall                                    -200
                    ●​ Robot is pushing grey box into wall
                    ●​ Robot is not able to move forward at the arena
                       boundary without a grey box

                None of the sensor bits are set to 1                                  -1

                On enabling “push” state. Initial attachment to grey box              +100

                Each step in “push” state                                             -1

                Grey box at boundary (Successful termination)                         +200




NOTE: This is a dynamic document, it will keep getting updated, please keep checking it regularly.
                                                                                                 8
           ○​ Difficulty levels (via flags in evaluate.py):
                  ■​ Static box
                  ■​ Blinking/appearing-disappearing box
                  ■​ Moving + blinking box (adjust --box_speed N)
                  ■​ Optional: --wall_obstacles for enabling the wall obstacle



           ○​ Scoring: Cumulative reward over fixed max_steps (2000 steps); terminal
              bonus on success; mean/std over multiple runs/seeds.

You need to implement policy algorithm in python and store it in file named as:
agent_template.py, the file should contain the following function with the definition
given below (it may have other helper functions), more details in section on Submission
Details:​
​
def policy(obs) -> str:​
# return one of: "L45", "L22", "FW", "R22", "R45"

In above “obs” is the input observations

Note: Current push is "attach and stick" (simplified); real physics pushing not fully
simulated.

NOTE the submitted RL policy algorithm file should have the exactly the same
function definition as given above, as your algorithm will be automatically
evaluated using a script.

5. Evaluation

5.1 Metric

We use mean cumulative reward (higher = better) as the evaluation metric. The
leaderboard shows the mean cumulative reward across 10 runs with and without the
wall obstacle during the development phase. The leaderboard will show the mean
cumulative reward across 10 runs with and without the wall obstacle for all 3 difficulty
levels during the test phase.

5.2 Development/Test Phase Evaluation

During each development sub-phase, the agent is evaluated for the respective difficulty
level with and without the wall obstacle for 10 runs with a step horizon of 2000 steps.


NOTE: This is a dynamic document, it will keep getting updated, please keep checking it regularly.
                                                                                                 9
During the final test phase, the submitted agent will be evaluated across all three
difficulty levels with and without the wall obstacle.

NOTE: You are required to submit during each of the development sub-phases and the
test phase. Each of the (sub-)phases has a specific weightage.

5.3 LLM Usage Policy

It is OK to use LLM or other sources (websites, blogs, books, etc) for:

   ●​ Coding ancillary parts of the algorithm such as plotting graphs, etc.
   ●​ To develop understanding of the algorithm in the case it is not clear to you

It is NOT OK to use LLM or other sources (websites, blogs, books, etc) for:

   ●​ Writing the code for the main parts of the algorithm especially given that I have
      already provided pseudo-code in the lectures. (You can use pseudo code as it is
      from the lecture slides)
   ●​ For doing hyper-parameter tuning of the algorithm.
   ●​ For doing analysis of the results and drawing conclusions about it

Since RL is a specialized domain, it is very straightforward to detect when someone
(especially a newbie) is taking code from LLM or other sources. In case you are found
to do so (even for a small part), there will be no questions asked direct zero will be
awarded to you along with further penalties which will affect your final grade. In short,
you are expected to implement the algorithms based on course lectures and
pseudocode.

Be a smart agent (remember Honesty is the best Policy), it is ok to loose a few marks
than getting a zero + penalties.

Remember that grading is relative and you are not the only one who is finding it tough!


6. Getting Started: Implementation and Code

Use Python 3 (PyTorch to be used for deep methods). You can use numpy, torch, etc.
Code must be well-documented: explain architecture, hyperparameters, and
experiments. Cite inspirations/papers. No LLM code generation allowed during
competition.



NOTE: This is a dynamic document, it will keep getting updated, please keep checking it regularly.
                                                                                                10
6.1 How to get started?

While there may be several ways to approach the problem, here are some suggestive
steps from our side to get started:

   1.​ Clone the GitHub repo: https://github.com/Exploration-Lab/CS780-OBELIX
   2.​ Explore the environment manually using the manual_play.py script. There are
       a bunch of options that you can use, including the --wall_obstacle option to
       enable the static wall. The robot rotates and moves using the keyboard keys,
       specifically
          ○​ w: “FW” (forward)
          ○​ a: “L22” (rotate left 22°) | q: “L45” (rotate left 45°)
          ○​ d: “R22” (rotate right 22°) | e: “R45” (rotate right 45°)
   3.​ Understand the observation vector and the reward calculation from the
       observation vector. This will help you identify your trained agents' shortcomings
       and learn how to discuss your policies qualitatively.
   4.​ Implement your agent using any of the policy control or value algorithms using
       the policy(obs) function in the agent_template.py file. The policy function
       must return the required action at that step, specifically one of L45, L22, FW,
       R22, R45
   5.​ Train your agent using the environment specified in obelix.py
   6.​ Evaluate your agent locally using python evaluate.py --level 0 for the
       easiest level. Use --level 2 for the second level and --level 3 for the
       hardest level
   7.​ Try out different RL algorithms locally and make submissions to Codabench.

6.2 Starter Code

To get you started, we have prepared a small toy algorithm for you to get started. We
have provided a simple training implementation of Double Deep Q-Network (DDQN) in
the starter code to help you understand how OBELIX could be trained in the
environment.

For submission on codabench, you only need to include:

agent.py + weights.pth

inside the submission.zip file.




NOTE: This is a dynamic document, it will keep getting updated, please keep checking it regularly.
                                                                                                11
6.2.1 Double Deep Q-Network (DDQN)

The starter training code is based on Double Deep Q-Network, which is an improved
version of Deep Q-Network (DQN).

One of the main problems with the original DQN algorithm is overestimation of action
values. In vanilla DQN, the same network is used for two tasks:

   1.​ Selecting the best action in the next state
   2.​ Evaluating the value of that selected action

When Q-value estimates are noisy (which is common during early training), this can
create optimistic bias, where the agent incorrectly believes that certain actions are much
better than they actually are. This often leads to unstable learning.

DDQN addresses this problem by separating these two responsibilities. Instead of using
the same network for both tasks, DDQN uses two networks:

   ●​ Online (main) network → selects the best action
   ●​ Target network → evaluates the value of that action

This simple modification significantly reduces overestimation bias and results in more
stable learning.

For more details about Double DQN, please refer to the original paper: Deep
Reinforcement Learning with Double Q-learning​
https://arxiv.org/pdf/1509.06461

We will highly recommend that you register for codabench and make one
submission on it using the starter code, this will help you to get accustomed to
the entire process.

Please check the starter code and the submission format here. Also, for environment
setup, please refer to the Enviornment Setup.

7. Codabench Leaderboard

7.1 Competition Link

The competition is hosted on Codabench:
https://www.codabench.org/competitions/14572/?secret_key=40fb7a5d-1364-44c7-a547
-055b16b12040



NOTE: This is a dynamic document, it will keep getting updated, please keep checking it regularly.
                                                                                                12
7.2 Registration

To take part in the competition, you need to register on Codabench. For this, you need
to create an account in the following format:

FirstLetterOfName_Rollno (e.g., a_123456 for Ashutosh Modi).

We suggest you create an account (username in the format above) and register. Make
one submission using the starter code to get used to the entire process.

NOTE if you do not create an account with the above mentioned username format, you
will not be registered in the competition.


7.3 Submission Policy

●​ Minimum 4 submissions per week in each development sub-phase is mandatory.
●​ Minimum 4 submissions in the final test phase is mandatory.
●​ The last valid submission before the deadline is your final entry.
●​ Please do not rush for last-minute submissions, as Codabench takes around 15–20
   minutes to evaluate each submission. Since many students will be participating, the
   evaluation time may increase due to higher load on Codabench. Therefore, it is
   advised not to wait until the last moment. Please try to make your submissions in the
   initial days of the week. Excuses related to Codabench evaluation delays will not be
   entertained.

7.4 Environment & Dependency Requirements

   ●​ Your submission must run correctly on a CPU-only environment.
   ●​ Even if you trained your agent/model using a GPU, the inference code must work
      on CPU without requiring CUDA or GPU support.
   ●​ If your agent uses trained weights, make sure to load them using CPU mapping
      (for example, map_location="cpu" when using PyTorch).
   ●​ Your code should not crash if a GPU is unavailable.
   ●​ Using PyTorch is allowed if required for your model.




NOTE: This is a dynamic document, it will keep getting updated, please keep checking it regularly.
                                                                                                13
8. Evaluation / Grading Criteria

Individual work only. Strict anti-cheating (code/viva checks → F if violation).

Your submission is evaluated on:

   1.​ Understanding of environment and experimentation.
   2.​ Submissions during development sub-phases (minimum 4 submissions per
       week).
   3.​ Code quality, documentation, modularity.
   4.​ Analysis of results (plots, why certain methods work/fail, visualizations like value
       maps or trajectories).
   5.​ Novelty and creativity of the algorithm (new ideas, not just off-the-shelf).
   6.​ Performance on the final phase (relative ranking).
   7.​ Viva: defend choices, explain code, experiments.
   8.​ Report: detail all attempts.
   9.​ Minimum submissions per phase (penalty if missed).
   10.​Note: Authentic efforts (even if not fully successful) will be valued over
       leaderboard rank.

9. Submission Details: Report and Code

Submit via Google Form (details from TAs):

   ●​ Report (LaTeX → PDF): follow template (Abstract, Introduction/motivation,
      methods, experiments, analysis, conclusions).
          ○​ The Report Template is provided here:
             https://drive.google.com/file/d/1PasQ4atuYoHdNQO33hjVzDQ6RdvclK3t/v
             iew?usp=sharing
          ○​ The LLM declaration will be part of your report and its questionnaire will be
             shared in the template.
   ●​ Code: zip of your agent.py, any weights (.pth), notebooks/scripts for
      training/experiments. Naming:
          ○​ CS780-OBELIX-[yourfirstname]-[yourlastname]-[rollno]-r
             eport.pdf
          ○​ …-code.zip
   ●​ Submission Form: https://forms.gle/LrE4WBj7KPje7nX7A




NOTE: This is a dynamic document, it will keep getting updated, please keep checking it regularly.
                                                                                                14
10. Timeline

NOTE: Please do not rush for last-minute submissions, as Codabench takes
around 15–20 minutes to evaluate each submission. Since many students will be
participating, the evaluation time may increase due to higher load on Codabench.
Therefore, it is advised not to wait until the last moment. Please try to make your
submissions in the initial days of the week. Excuses related to Codabench
evaluation delays will not be entertained.


10.1 Phase 1 (Level 1 Dev Phase)

   ●​ Start (Development Phase for Level-1): 9th March 2026, 12:00 AM IST
   ●​ End (Development Phase for Level-1): 22nd March 2026, 11:59 PM IST.

10.2 Phase 2 (Level 2 Dev Phase)

   ●​ Start (Development Phase for Level-2): 23rd March 2026, 12:00 AM IST
   ●​ End (Development Phase for Level-2): 29th March 2026, 11:59 PM IST.

10.3 Phase 3 (Level 3 Dev Phase)

   ●​ Start (Development Phase for Level-3): 30th March 2026, 12:00 AM IST
   ●​ End (Development Phase for Level-3): 5th April 2026, 11:59 PM IST.

10.4 Phase 4 (Test Phase)

   ●​ Final Submission Phase: 6th April 2026, 12:00 AM IST to 12th April 2026, 11:59
      PM IST.
   ●​ Final submissions, report/code: 13th April 2026, 9:00 AM IST (submission via
      Google Form)
   ●​ Viva: 14th April 2026 to 24th April 2026.

       Deadlines are strict — Codabench will automatically close as per the
       timeline.

11. Possible Ideas

11.1 Background Tutorials

To help you get started:




NOTE: This is a dynamic document, it will keep getting updated, please keep checking it regularly.
                                                                                                15
   ●​ Original paper (1991/1992): “Automatic Programming of Behaviour-based Robots
      using Reinforcement Learning” by Mahadevan & Connell — read for motivation
      and classic approach (Q-learning + clustering for generalization).
   ●​ CS780 Reinforcement Learning course lectures (especially Q-learning, SARSA,
      function approximation, policy gradients).
   ●​ Sutton & Barto book: Chapters on tabular RL, TD methods, eligibility traces.
   ●​ OpenAI Gym / simple RL tutorials for discrete action spaces.
   ●​ PyTorch RL examples: DQN for discrete actions.

You have learned several algorithms in the course, it would make sense to try out all
those that are applicable in this setting. For example,

11.2 Tabular / Value-based Methods

Classic Q-learning or SARSA (like the original paper). Discretize state space (binary
sensors already discrete). Use eligibility traces for faster credit assignment.

11.3 Function Approximation and Deep RL

DQN, Double DQN, Dueling DQN (with neural net on flattened obs). Or policy gradient
methods like REINFORCE / PPO for direct policy learning. Great for generalization
across seeds/difficulties.

11.4 Evolutionary Strategies & Heuristics

Simple hand-coded behaviors (e.g., Braitenberg-style or finite-state machine). Or
CMA-ES / genetic algorithms to evolve policy parameters. Combine with RL
(hierarchical or behavior-based).

11.5 What approach should I take?

No single best way — experiment heavily! Start with a random/heuristic baseline, then
tabular Q, then deep methods. Try reward shaping, multi-task learning across
difficulties, exploration tricks (epsilon-greedy, entropy bonus). Resource limits: keep
nets small (Colab-friendly). Creativity wins — novel state representations or hybrid
approaches encouraged.

NOTE: No matter what approach you develop, it MUST involve development of an
RL-based algorithm.




NOTE: This is a dynamic document, it will keep getting updated, please keep checking it regularly.
                                                                                                16
12. Lost? Whom to contact?

Don’t panic: RL on robots is hard but rewarding! Seek help instead of shortcuts. Use the
Discord Channel: #capstone-project:

   ●​ Divyaksh Shukla : divyaksh@cse.iitk.ac.in
   ●​ Sanjeet Singh : sanjeet@cse.iitk.ac.in
   ●​ Dattatreya Pokala : pokala24@cse.iitk.ac.in
   ●​ Instructor: deeprl.iit@gmail.com

Ask about environment details, debugging, concepts — we want you to learn!



13. References

   ●​ Mahadevan, S., & Connell, J. (1992). Automatic programming of behavior-based
      robots using reinforcement learning. Artificial Intelligence, 55(2-3), 311–365.
      (https://cdn.aaai.org/AAAI/1991/AAAI91-120.pdf )
   ●​ Reinforcement                Learning:             An               Introduction
      (https://web.stanford.edu/class/psych209/Readings/SuttonBartoIPRLBook2ndEd.
      pdf )




NOTE: This is a dynamic document, it will keep getting updated, please keep checking it regularly.
                                                                                                17
